LERNER(1)                        User Commands                        LERNER(1)

NAME
        lerner - conversational program that learns

SYNOPSIS
        lerner

DESCRIPTION
        Lerner is a stand-alone conversational program that can learn by
        building a vocabulary.  It supports a simple grammatical syntax
        containing a subject, verb and predicate.  The predicate can contain
        an optional adjective.  The syntax is as follows:

        [article] subject verb [article] [adjective] predicate

        Each field must consist of a single word.  The articles, "a", "an" and
        "the" are optional.  Statements can be made questions by adding a "?"
        at the end.  Questions can also start with the words "who", "what",
        "does", "do", "is" and "are".  The question mark is optional when
        starting a question with these words.

        Words must be spelled with the same capitalization as they were
        defined.  One exception is at the beginning of a sentence where the
        first letter can be capitalized even if the word was defined in
        lower-case.

        Lerner supports the following commands:

            vocab [word] - Print the words I know
            dump         - Print the words as hex codes
            forget       - Remove a word from memory
            save [file]  - Save the words to a file (default lerner.voc)
            load [file]  - Load the words from a file (default lerner.voc)
            reset        - Reset the word table
            basic        - Reset the word table to a basic list
            history      - Print the short term memory
            goodbye      - Exit the program
            bye          - Exit the program (same as goodbye)
            help         - Print this list of commands


AUTHOR
        Dave Hein

COPYRIGHT
        Copyright (c) 2011-2014 Dave Hein
        MIT License (See license.txt in the root directory)
        This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
        There is no warranty, to the extent permitted by law.


TAZOS Program                     March 2012                          LERNER(1)
